This is Daryl Lane, Keith Johnson, and David Carson.
This will be the second of two shows on the subject of First Contact.
You'll remember from our last show that a First Contact story is one which humans and
aliens meet for the first time.
Our treatment of the topic this time will emphasize movies dealing with the First Contact
The 40s and 50s would be a classic period for the Bug-Eyed Monster movie.
Recall some of the titles of those years.
It came from outer space.
The blob.
Them.
The thing.
I remember a lot of those movies too, particularly it came from outer space, were in 3D.
And of course that was even more horrifying when your Bug-Eyed Monster would be in three
dimensions rather than two.
And of course everyone had to wear the glasses, the special 3D glasses to appreciate the effects.
But of course those movies were almost all the same.
They all tried to outdo each other in the weirdness of their Bug-Eyed Monsters.
The hostility that they would have toward humans.
Destructive power that they each had.
Today would seem a little ridiculous to us.
Of course there are some movies today which we can talk about a little bit later which
go back to that early trend of the Bug-Eyed Monsters.
I think one of the reasons for that might be the time period in which they were made.
Being in the 40s and the 50s, the era of World War II, shortly after World War II, entering
into McCarthyism and the Cold War.
Anything that wasn't one of us must be one of them and couldn't possibly be friendly.
And that probably led to a lot of the, it came from outer space type of movie.
Of course that has a long tradition behind it, the monster.
Back to the very beginnings of literature, human literature, the Sumerian Epic of Gilgamesh,
the Greek epics of Homer, the Cyclops, the One Eyed Creatures.
All the ancient heroes had to face some kind of monster, some kind of alien creature.
You can trace that through all periods of literary history, all cultures.
And of course for science fiction that was perfect.
They could pick up on that, they could have their Bug-Eyed Monsters arrive in space vehicles.
They could do anything they wanted to in making them weird.
It was just another vehicle for the larger than life hero in the...
Right, a formula story.
Out of this world monster.
A formula story, exactly.
And of course all those Bug-Eyed Monster movies would have a beautiful heroine.
Of course with not many clothes on, of course the monster usually wanted her for some reason.
And the hero had to rescue her.
And it was a typical formula story.
One of the first breaks in those formula stories was Robert Wise's The Day the Earth
Stood Still.
And this was made in 1951 and it was...
The premise behind the story was an advanced being and his companion land on the earth,
make initial contact with the earthlings.
And the earthlings first contact with them is violent.
They shoot him on the spot.
And his message is that if the earth doesn't shape up and get their internal conflicts
under control they will not be allowed to take them off planet.
And he is in essence a benevolent alien.
And this was a new sort of trend for science fiction movies.
This hadn't really been expounded on before.
Especially at that time.
That wasn't long after the Second World War.
No one is right there on the mill with McCarthyism period.
Right.
You recall that story by Leinster where he equates the aliens with the Japanese, you
know the vicious enemy.
To have a movie like this in the, what was it, the 51 where the alien is friendly and
non-aggressive and the humans he comes in contact with wish to destroy him.
That must have been a great change for theater goers to run across that kind of science fiction
movie.
And it was extremely popular.
Wasn't there a robot in that movie?
Wasn't his companion, you mentioned his companion.
Wasn't the companion a robot or a?
Yes, in the movie Clatu the quote human alien had a companion robot named Gort.
Now in the short story this is taken from farewell to the master.
It ends up that the master is really the robot and the companion is the human.
But this is never really brought out in the movie version of it.
Gort in the movie is a sort of inner planetary policeman.
Of course in a way the day the Earth stood still was tied to its time period.
The war was over and treaties had been signed and this might have been a way of expressing
the brotherhood of man.
The fact that we had gone through a huge war.
We killed other human beings, other living creatures.
And the movie did not, I don't think it presented humans in a very fine way.
We could see ourselves as war makers, as aggressors, as having gone through a terrible war.
Perhaps that movie had a message to it.
Making us see ourselves is a great country.
I believe it did.
It used a common formula for movies of that time in which the military were the war makers
and the scientists were sort of the intellectual far-seeing peacemakers.
And that was brought out at the end of the movie where the collection of scientists gathered
and they wanted to speak with Clatu and the military were saying, well no this is now
dangerous and it's now a military operation.
And then Clatu comes out and gives his final and rather famous speech and then they depart.
Another movie which treated the aliens more sensitively I think was also in the 1950s,
1955, This Island Earth.
This Island Earth, the crux of that story was there was a planet farthest apart of our
galaxy which was at war with a totally alien race and they had come to Earth to use some
of the Earth people's technology plus their expertise and just the manpower to build some
more weapons and then transport them back to Madaluna which was the planet which they
came from.
There are a highly intelligent race which used several subsystems of the race on their
planet, one of them being a rather insect-like monster which provided one of the more harrowing
moments in the movie where the monster gets loose on board the ship and of course chases
the harrowing around the ship before it's eventually destroyed.
It treated the aliens as a benevolent creature in the end.
The alien who transported them to Madaluna takes them back to Earth and leaves them there before
his ship eventually runs out of fuel and burns up in the atmosphere.
But at the same time even in the 50s you would have, in fact you always have this, a return
to the bug-eyed monster motif.
The first version of the invasion of the body snatchers was in 1956.
Of course we've had another version recently.
Yes, it was remade in 1979.
But that is totally a scare movie.
Not only are you meeting aliens but their particular form.
In fact they're not intelligent aliens if I recall correctly.
They simply take over the host body in a habit.
They take over the host body and they overlay the host with their own emotions.
Their own motivations.
Well really their own motivations.
They're not really very emotional creatures.
They're very unemotional, very logical.
You don't get very good grasp of what the aliens are like at all.
The aliens are a spore-like creature which is a parasitic and it literally reconstructs
a new human from the original human's tissue and finally absorbs it into its own system
and kills the original human and the duplicate human comes alive with all the memories of
the original human but in sort of a new order, new pattern.
And of course they are here to conquer.
They are here to take over the earth.
Even if it isn't an intelligent conflict, why, that is the kind of thing that they are
built to do.
This is taken from an old theory by Arrhenius that life on earth started from spores which
migrated through space on the wings of the solar wind perhaps, landed on earth and then
began life here.
It's an interesting theory, discredited but still interesting.
Well the second version of the movie, the recent one, I think it's two years old or
so, the beginning of that I think in a lot of ways the earlier version was the better,
the classic.
But the beginning of the second one was well done showing the spores traveling through
space, arriving on earth and becoming part of our ecology and eventually taking over
human bodies.
But that's a true horror movie.
You know not only are we up against aliens but when you think of some non-human creature
taking over your body or destroying your existence but using your physical structure where you
have no control, that's, you can see where people would be horrified at such a thing.
In most first context stories at least you have some kind of alien with a personality
hostile or non-hostile, you can talk with them but here you haven't got anything you
can really talk to or argue with.
Now the aliens are really humans who have changed their mind.
That's really the only way you could look at them in the movie.
It's an alien being in the movie was somebody who you once knew but suddenly their system
of values and what they held dear to them they have just simply changed their mind and
become a different person.
2001 I think could be called the first contact movie.
It's a very different type, again you have no aliens in it but it is an excellent first
course based on Clark's short story The Sentinel and along with Kubrick he collaborated on
the movie and it probably is, most people consider it to be the best science fiction
movie I ever made, obviously a matter of opinion.
But of course similar also to his book Childhoods End in which the alien, even though we never
meet the aliens and don't know much about them they are clearly superior to human beings.
In fact they have come in and taken a guiding hand in the development of the human species.
Yes, they have actually, yes, you get the impression at the first of the movie that
they had been responsible for evolution.
Taking an ape-like or man-like creature was still seemingly an ape and guiding it along
evolutionary paths until they reached the point they can travel to the moon and find
the next signal in the terms of this huge monolith and it emitted some high, some signal,
some frequency that they could follow and they sent, of course they sent their huge ship
following that signal with Hal, a computer in control of it.
And at the end of the movie of course the star child, very ambiguous ending but still
at the same time it was optimistic.
You get the idea of a new stage in human evolution just as the ape-like creatures had become
men at the beginning because of the alien's help that humans in the movie were ready to
move on to some further stage in evolution, some higher level because of the help of the
aliens.
And I think this is about the only way that you can depict an alien who is very far above
you. You can't really, we can't do it because we're limited in our human imaginations and
you almost have to depict him sort of off stage meddling in human affairs.
And many times in the movies they have to depict him off stage because special effects
couldn't accommodate him.
That's true too.
Well with that particular movie of course there was no problem with the special effects
on the alien. All they had to do was to conceive of this monolithic signal, this monolith I
guess of what you call it.
Some sort of transponder or you never really were given a concrete definition as to what
it was other than it was something that Signal D'Arre brought about, Jump and Man's intellect
or his reasoning.
It's interesting to read the story, the Sentinel from which the movie came. There's a very
great difference. In the story an expedition to the moon comes upon a monolith. It's on
the surface by the way, in the movie it was buried, they had to dig it out.
But in the story it was on the surface and of course it stuck out to such an extent that
the humans couldn't miss it.
And they go up and they study it, they realize it's the product of a far superior culture.
They also can calculate that it's been millions of years since the monolith was set up on
the moon. They don't know what the purpose of it is. But of course the point of the story
is wondering, who were they, when did they come, why did they come, where are they now.
And Clark leads us to believe at the end of it that the aliens, whoever they were, set
this up on the moon to signal them as to when the humans had reached a sufficient point
in technology that they could reach the moon from Earth.
And of course the movie created one of the greatest or most memorable characters if you
can call him that in science fiction environment and that of course is Hal, the computer. That
was well done I thought. He becomes a character in his own right.
Consider the television audience. You have to have something that's familiar, you have
to have something that's sharp. If you had a show that showed aliens as benevolent or
dealt with any kinds of deep questions regarding first contact, I don't think it would work.
You have to go back to the bug-eyed monster, the menace, something that people can feel
quickly and understand quickly. You can't get as much depth in a movie as you can in
a book and you can get even less depth in a TV show. You have to stick to action. Even
Star Trek for example, although it did look at a lot of different interesting themes and
work on some controversial subjects, was essentially as Roddenberry admitted, a wagon train to the
stars. It was an adventure series.
There were a number of Star Trek episodes which dealt with first contact. One of them
I think based on a Frederick Brown short story, Arena.
Yeah, that one being where the enterprise encountered an aggressive alien force on one
of our Federation planets and drove them off planet and then continued to pursue them across
the galaxy and were stopped by extremely vastly superior race and one person from each crew
on each ship was taken down to fight in this arena on this world. One being the Gorn,
a lizard-like creature and the other being Captain Kirk. They eventually had a rather
long and arduous battle at which Kirk was eventually victorious. He decided not to kill
the Gorn which proved our superiority and our humanity over the Gorn race and we were
spared annihilation because the superior race which was hosting this battle had decided
to kill the victor because they would be the most dangerous, but instead they had spared
both the Gorn and the human race and allowed them to live on.
That's almost an obvious way of treating the first contact material in that you have an
alien who looks like a reptile, who is a reptile. You have a human being and they are going
at one-on-one combat with the loser to lose everything his ship, his crew and so forth.
That isn't a motif in many ancient literatures, in fact in the Greek epics, in the Iliad,
the prototype of war stories. Various times in the battle, one of the Greek warriors,
one of the Trojan warriors would step out into an arena, the battlefield, everybody
else would gather around and they would go at it one-on-one. The rules being the winner
would take all, the loser would of course lose all.
That seems to be fairly common in a lot of cultures, that was fairly common in the Indian
cultures in the Northern United States and down in New Mexico and South America. It's
also fairly common in African cultures, so this seems to be a world-
Easily translatable into the alien first contact material, very dramatic, very visual, and I
thought that was one of their better episodes. That's one thing television can do, it does
have limitations, but it's very dramatic, it's very visual, it's very immediate, and
they have that kind of contact. Of course with the message at the end of it, when the
human did not kill the alien, the idea that non-aggression got him something.
A couple of times Star Trek did manage to bring across a first contact story that was
not immediate action oriented. The story of the Hortov, of course, is one of their best
ones. An alien being was apparently killing off a colony on some planet and it turned out
that this alien being was the last survivor of an almost dead race who was protecting
her young. They didn't recognize, the humans did not recognize this because the young and
the alien herself looked like pieces of rock, pieces of mineral, but it turned out that
she was merely exhibiting mother love. This is kind of a difficult thing to portray on
television, and I think it was to Star Trek's credit they were able to bring it off successfully.
I think one of the best things television has done as long as we're talking about television in regard to
first contact stories is one that I don't often think of as first contact, but I believe it. It should be
considered as such, and that would be Ray Bradbury's Martian Chronicles. I think of all the first
contact works I can think of. Perhaps this better than any other illustrates the learning of something
about ourselves, a reflection of our own culture because of the contact. Of course all we do, we go to
Mars and contact the remnants of a much, much older Martian culture, and because of that contact we see
ourselves as hostile, as aggressive. Of course this is a series of short stories, you know, over a
period of time. We see ourselves as materialistic, you know, all of the bad qualities which the
human race does have. And of course finally the humans that are on Mars are locked there because of the fact
Earth destroys itself, which they can tell, but I believe that was a three-part episode on television. I think
one of the better things they've done on television, but it was excellent first contact material.
Yes, the switching from television to movies, the movies recently had two very different first contact.
Extremes almost.
Extremes in the thematic approach. The first one we'll talk about is Alien, a movie directed by Ridley Scott and
written by Dan O'Bannon and others. It is essentially a something-goes-bump-in-the-night horror movie in that the
Earthlings are traveling along in a gigantic mining ship and they're awakened by their computers and told that
some sort of signal has been picked up emanating from this planet and they go down to investigate and a rather
gruesome, very non-benevolent alien is brought on board and the alien systematically starts dispatching the crew and also
using the crew as a part of its reproductive cycle. It implants egg inside them and the egg eventually forms a pod and the
pod sits around waiting for some other life form to come by and when the other life form comes by it implants itself inside it and
then furthers implants an egg inside that life form, in this case being a human life form, and the egg matures further and then uses the
life form as food and then breaks out of them and then grows into the adult alien which goes around searching for more life forms
to implant eggs and so on and so on. The thing about this movie which brought it out of the mediocre was its stunning visuals.
It was beautifully photographed and the creature that they devised in this is probably one of the best monsters ever created for the screen.
But on the other hand it's still a bug-eyed monster.
Very true.
The movie you're right, the movie was a fine movie and it was saved by the technology, the visual effects, but as some critics remarked and I totally agree with this, it was really a
jaws set in outer space.
Very true. It was a cross between jaws and star wars.
But still I would say as you mentioned earlier it was an extreme. I mean there are extremes in the treatment of aliens in the movies today and that of course would be the extreme that goes back to the bug-eyed
monster days.
And one of the more optimistic movies that has to deal with first contact is of course Close Encounters of the Third Kind.
That being a movie by Steven Spielberg, written by Steven Spielberg and directed by him also.
I think that probably would be considered the classic first encounter movie in Hollywood history.
It incorporates a lot of the elements of first contact that UFO specialists and others interested in first contact on a real basis have been talking about for a number of years.
Yes, it was obviously crafted with a lot of love and attention to detail and it seems to me to be a very passionate work and that he obviously wanted to portray and show something that he held very close to himself.
Well consider what it would be like. To me the movie more than anything else, the details of it, the plot structure, all of this was subservient to one thing and that was the feeling.
What's it going to be like when we actually and truly make first contact with an alien culture? What are we going to feel like?
Now of course one way that the early movies treated that was well they're going to be monsters, they're going to be hostile.
We can't show them where we live if it happens off the earth.
But this movie at the end of it in particular you got a sense of wonder, a sense of fascination, a sense of awe that we have contacted an alien culture.
They are not hostile. What's it going to mean?
It's an opportunity for us rather than something we should be afraid of.
Yes, it's an extremely optimistic ending to the movie.
Now of course the communication in the movie was, if you can call it that I suppose, was sonics or sound or tonal qualities rather than any kind of language or...
Yes they communicated with sound and light.
And the movie is actually done on two levels.
One with the electrical technician working for the power company who had an encounter with an alien craft which transferred this image of where the alien culture was.
And where they were going to land to him.
On the second level it was an international organization which was tracking down possible landing sites.
And using extreme advanced technology was determining where they were going to land, when they were going to land.
They had this all figured out in advance.
And when they finally, or hero convert, finally gets to the area where the craft is going to land.
All these other people from all over the world have also converged on this one spot because they have also had sightings and they've also had this thought implanted in them that something is going to happen here of extreme importance.
So they've all going there to find out what it is.
And once first contact is made and the aliens are actually seen and our people go on board to a journey with them on through space.
The movie ends on just a very, very high note, very, very high optimism.
I think that scene where the principal alien ship lands and the people have prepared for them with the sound and the lights and the interchange, the sound, at first very tentative, sort of timid.
And finally it works up to a huge crescendo.
The looks on the faces of the humans as they realize what they've done here is just, to me, is one of the most beautiful things done in science fiction movies.
Even the military personnel, and you traditionally in the movies see the military as fairly hard people and not willing to go along with this kind of viewpoint, but everybody there is staring up at the mothership in awe and wonder.
It's quite a great feeling.
I can't think of a movie that would be more extreme from Alien than this one.
It's almost totally different at the other end of the spectrum.
You know, the aliens are non-aggressive, they are friendly, they are superior, but they do seem to be benevolent too.
This is Daryl Lane.
Keith Johnson.
And David Carson.
Thank you.